Hello! Julia here and you are watching a new episode of HOW THEY CHANGED.
The best cop show of recent times – one of the most innovative and influential dramas of all time – was set not in New York, Miami or LA, but in Baltimore.
It featured a squad of embattled, super smart, sardonic detectives fighting against the drug dealing and killing blitzing their beloved city.
This series stemmed from the pen of the godlike David Simon and was as literate, funny and deep as television could be.
But it was not The Wire. It was Homicide: Life On The Street.
The fact that “The Wire” was on HBO and not network TV certainly allowed it to push boundaries, and it obviously influenced every crime drama that followed it.
However, Simon has said multiple times that without “Homicide,” there wouldn’t have been a “Wire”.
“Homicide” is the true progenitor of the modern crime drama.
Simon regards Homicide as "a series of interconnected short stories", comparing it – rather grandiosely – to James Joyce's Dubliners.
For me, Homicide is the missing link between Hill Street Blues and The Wire.
The links with The Wire and the book are myriad.
In one hilarious episode, detectives Munch and Bolander re-enact Simon's anecdote about a suspect confessing after taking a "lie-detection test" – using the station photocopier.
"Then David went and did it in The Wire," Fontana protests.
"I was like, 'Dude! We already did it.' He said, 'Yeah I know, but I wanted to do it again.'"
“Homicide” was far ahead of its time in every respect.
It more or less created the mood and aesthetics of contemporary crime dramas.
This was thanks to the vision and hard work of “Rain Man” director Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana, who would later go on to create “Oz.”
The quality of the scripts attracted star names such as Kathryn Bigelow, Steve Buscemi, John Waters, Kathy Bates and James Earl James.
Edie Falco, Elijah Wood and Jake Gyllenhaal made early appearances, as did Chris Rock, as a paedophile suspected of killing Adena.
Barry Levinson established the show's groundbreaking visual style from episode one,
draining it of color and shooting entirely on hand-held cameras that swooped in and out of the actors' faces, jabbing at them like a boxer.
And, amazingly, the killing of schoolgirl Adena Watson was left unsolved.
"That would never happen now. We live in the world of procedural crime dramas now," Fontana laments, referring to CSI – which he openly disdains.
Although it managed to run for seven seasons from1993 to 1999, it’s not controversial to suggest that “Homicide” had bad luck.
NBC could never seem to figure out how to pitch it so it would resonate with audiences.
They didn’t ignore it: the show’s first episode won the coveted post-Super Bowl time slot, and NBC continued to order episodes even though ratings weren’t great.
Sure, not all the choices NBC made were helpful, but maybe we just weren’t ready yet.
While audiences didn’t fully embrace the show, the critics did.
The show received heaps of accolades, and won three Peabody Awards.
The show took risks at every turn.
"The network would say, 'Where's the pretty girl? Where's the hunky guy?'
We had Danny Baldwin! We had the least attractive cast on television!"
Over time, the show managed to build a comfortable - if not spectacular - audience, and traded in several of the older, less conventionally attractive cast members for young studs.
I would love for younger viewers to be able to get their hands on “Homicide".
In a better world, their perspective would help old folks like me better understand the show — and its place in TV history.
Don`t forget to leave a like and subscribe for more!
And take care friends.